Today is Friday the 29th of January, this is a test.
Last time we were discussing the job that you had as
Deputy Chief and then Chief of the Armed Forces
Special Weapons Project and you were there from
1951 until 1957
and we were talking about some of the
personalities, we were talking about LeMay is
where we ended up. I'd like to talk right now about
another personality that you must have known,
Teller, Edward Teller, the so-called father of
the H-bomb.
What type of relationship did you have with him?
A rather lengthy one and varied. I have a Christmas
card over there that I got from Dr. and Mrs. Teller
this Christmas.
Dr. Teller, of course, was in the original group of
scientists working on the A-bomb and was at Los
Alamos. And after the
war was over and we began—then the Atomic Energy
Commission formed, and we established another
laboratory at Livermore, California, and he was
made director of that laboratory. And
as such, worked with the commission on all of the
things related to operating a laboratory, what
research program they would have, what funds they
would have, what budget, what kind of hiring
policies, and all of the things that are involved
in running an entity of that sort. And
as a member of the Military Liaison Committee
staff,
And later in the Enforcer Special Weapons
Project, we were interested in and had inputs to
essentially
all of the projects that either of the
laboratories was doing. And so we had a continuous
liaison with an officer there on the laboratory.
us, and very frequent meetings and discussions
with the personnel of the laboratory, including
Teller. And so we probably sat down together once
every two weeks to once every month for the full
time that I was in the Armed Forces Special Weapons
Project. I worked with them on the research
program for weapons, the testing program, the
weapons effects program,
their research programs into other areas of
military interest,
testing problems.
Well, just about anything you can think of in
connection with the nuclear weapons field,
nuclear weapons and nuclear propulsion field.
And during this period of time, work also began,
research work on the fusion field for power.
And of course, it continued in the weapons field.
And this relationship of course was closer still
when I took his weapons to the Pacific to test them
and his laboratory personnel and even more so when
I came back from that and took over as general
manager of AEC and was therefore headed the entity
to which he submitted all his plans and programs
and budget requirements and other things. So
worked very closely with him there until I
left there at the end of six years to go to the Jet
Propulsion Lab. And while I saw him several times
after that, including a couple of times here at
Texas A&M, I've
not been working with him because he's still in
that business and I'm in some other business. What
was your opinion of him?
I said the same thing, I guess, about a good many
people. He was a wonderful, wonderful man,
wonderful person.
I have very deepest respect for him. and for his
capabilities, as well as his qualities as a human
being and as a man.
He's considerate, compassionate.
He believes strongly, and he makes his case
strongly, and sticks to it, and usually wins. One
of the major issues was the disagreement between
Oppenheimer and Teller on the development of the
H-bomb. Would you like to comment on that? To the
extent to recognize that one was on one side of the
fence and one on the other,
arguments would be what one, bring out the points
that one would expect. Needless to say, I was in
full agreement with Teller and not in agreement
with Oppenheimer, so it wasn't hard to determine
where my sympathies were. Some people have
charged, and it might be an unfair charge, that
Teller was influential in congressional
hearings. in persuading the government to take
Oppenheimer's security clearance away? I have no
personal knowledge of this, but I do not believe
it's so.
I can't speak from personal knowledge, but I do not
believe it's true. What impact did the
development of the H-bomb have on the Armed Forces
Special Weapons Project? Well, it broadened our
approach. I mean, all of the functions that we had
to perform, we had to now expand by orders of
magnitude in terms of the increased power that we
would expect from this development. One of the
roughest things that happened to us was
propelling us immediately into the, beyond the
technology available in cryogenics.
Because in the early approach to the H-bomb,
everything had to be done close to absolute zero
temperature. And this is a very costly and
extremely difficult problem. And we, as other
development agencies, were involved heavily. as
we went down the road, we found a way to get around
this and could abandon that approach. I have a
notion that the United States learned more about
the physics and chemistry of low temperatures in a
couple of years than they probably learned in all
the rest of history. Besides the development of
the H-bomb, there were other new weapons that were
developed in the 1950s. Would you comment on those
special projects that you people worked on? Well,
one has to be very careful here of security. I've
been out of the process now for a number of years. I
don't know all of the things that have been
classified or declassified.
But one of our primary objectives was to get the
explosive power up and the weight down such that
they could be handled
in our intercontinental ballistic missiles and
other applications. Because the penalty and
delivery systems that one pays for heavy weight is
very great indeed. So a pound off of the portion to
be delivered sometimes is 100 pounds or more off of
the total weight of what one has to launch or move.
And so that was one of the big objectives. The
other, of course, is getting any of the weapons so
that they have a long life
in storage or in inactive status, because you
certainly hope that's the way they're going to
stay, and to be absolutely sure on all aspects of
safety. And so, very much of the energy went into
this area. The other major area of effort was that
of determining weapons of fact, of various kinds
and magnitudes of detonations. And
our agency was the one charged fully with that
responsibility. So much of our energy was there.
And of course, this took the cooperation of the
laboratories, the development people, the
researchers.
everyone in the business in order to pin down the
effects. So, we could summarize by saying that
your mission then was dealt with reducing weight,
longevity, safety, and the effects. And
deliverability, yeah. And the deliverability.
Okay.
now concerning the effects and this is we were
talking before about this and this is very
important it's been in the news recently uh you've
been at uh as far as you know more atomic blasts than
any other human at one time okay i'm not
necessarily true now yes and uh i'd like to I'd like
you to tell me about some of the early testing and
some of the findings. You know, things of course
that are not classified, but some of the findings.
What were you looking for, and what did you find,
and did you expect to find the things that you were
looking for? In the effects area, and I think you
were talking effects rather than development.
In the effects area, I don't think we really found
any surprises. If we did, they were surprises on
the safe side rather than on the horror side.
If you remember earlier all of the talk of
sterility resulting from exposure of just almost
any amount. And everyone was scared.
We found, I think, as we should have expected to
find, that yes, it can create sterility if the dose
is high enough and sustained long enough, the same
as can x-ray or exposures to a bit many other
things.
The argument is still, of course, going on heavily
as to the results of the effects of exposure to
low-level radiation over long periods of time,
particularly. And I don't think that anyone's
going to know all the answers to that for a good many
years yet.
from the work that we did, we were convinced that
this effect was very minimal, and in some cases
even beneficial. And if the exposure was not
sufficiently rapid that your body couldn't take
care of it, that it did in fact get busy to repair
much of the uh, damage that is done by the
radiation.
And so we think that the fear of it
is a very much more dangerous effect than the
effect of the radiation itself, except in direct
exposure to, uh, either to explosions, I mean
direct exposure, direct exposure to explosion,
or direct exposure to hard radiation from
reactors or power-producing reactions.
With respect to the other effects, particularly
blast,
as soon as one knows the characteristic of the
blast wave, computation
can then
come very close to determining the effect of any
particular blast on any particular plate or
point.
So there's nothing really mysterious about that
one. The explosion has a blast wave and blast
effects that are quite different from dynamite or
TNT or some other explosive, but they are alike
within themselves. I mean, a nuclear detonation
is a nuclear detonation, and its blast wave has
certain characteristics, and it'll be the same
yesterday as tomorrow. So that one, though taking
a very great deal of work to pin down, is not subject
to particular controversy or further
difficulty.
And so far as the danger from radiation is
concerned, it is very much overdone, except what
might result from direct exposure to a nuclear
detonation, such as you would have in war, such as
you had at Hiroshima or Nagasaki.
That one, in my view, is blown out of proportion,
too, because the people who were directly exposed
either were killed, or if they survived, the
effects were certainly observable. We
have been following every family that was over
there that
were within certain ranges of the explosion, or
even said they were in there.
And I think we haven't learned a great deal about
anything, in fact, from that. Well, you know, when
you open up a newspaper or a magazine, often you see
articles dealing with, well, the 60 Minutes. You
probably saw 60 Minutes a couple of years ago. I
think Mike Wallace had the program in which he
interviewed some veterans who had been at some of
the 1950 blasts out in Oh Tim, Nevada, and you know,
it was played up like the American government were
using its soldiers as getting pigs, and now these
people have a higher incident rate of cancer,
genetic problems. What's your response to those
charges? It's a bunch of baloney. For my money,
it's complete baloney. They didn't get enough
exposure out of their participation in Nevada. to
change anything that was going to happen to them as
far as I'm concerned. And most of their troubles, I
think, are imaginary with a
vision somewhere in their mind of Uncle Sam taking
care of them from now on. And I've got no truck with
any of them. I don't think there's anything
to it at all. And did the Armed Forces Special
Weapons Project or when you were in charge of the
AEC, did they carry out their own investigation of
these charges? Well, of course these charges
didn't arise until very recently. The AEC at the
time, and the Armed Forces Special Weapons
Project at the time, and the Army at the time for
that matter, tabulated all of the exposures, and
all these people had film badges, and they were
turned in, and everything was tracked as well as it
could be tracked at that time. And whether there
were any individual overexposures,
overexposures being something beyond what the
limits had been set for the exercise,
I don't know. I didn't hear any. But if so, there
were damn few. And they weren't the people that
Mike Wallace was talking
to. Now, during the 1950s, there were a couple
hundred above ground explosions? Is that about an
approximate number, about two hundred were
there? That may be a little high, perhaps a hundred
fifty, something like that. I could count them,
but it would take a while. Okay, now today of course
we have a strong environmentalist lobby, and we
don't have above ground testing anymore. The
question is, Some people have said, why did the
government have to carry out so many tests? What
would your response be? There are about three
reasons, I think. First, I think that
knowledgeable people, in terms of our security,
would agree that
it was in our best interest to get on with the
development of nuclear weapons and getting them
into the stockpile in usable form.
If one did agree to this, starting from where we
were,
with one test and two detonations
on the enemy, that's not much background. No, not
much knowledge. And so we had to move.
We had a long, long ways to go. Those first devices,
I'd hate to hesitate to call them weapons, were
very heavy, clumsy devices. We couldn't have
built a national defense based on that kind of a
piece of mechanism.
So we not only had to develop the physics and
nucleonics of nuclear weapons, we had to develop
the hardware and the deliverability and the
safety and all these various things. Now, they
say, could you have tested them below ground?
Well, in retrospect, yes, we could have, except we
didn't know enough about it at that point to know
whether we could or not. That is a research project
that takes a little time also. So while we were
testing below ground, we were also testing below
ground and developing the techniques for testing
below ground. How one instruments at a thousand or
two thousand feet below the surface is a pretty
rough problem by itself.
It probably costs something like one-tenth as
much to test above ground as it does below ground.
Some effects would have to be determined above
ground. They just could not be determined below
ground. As an example, what effect does a
high-altitude explosion have on the ionosphere?
You'll never find out the answer to that testing
2,000, 3,000 feet below the surface. So some
things had to be done in the air.
I think those were all adequate reasons for the
things that we did. We took quite extreme
precautions in terms of
safety from fallout and contamination.
It's true that there were some times when the
weather didn't act just exactly as we had
projected. was a little fallout dropped
off-site. But in nearly all cases, that's been
blown up by the press,
and the actual damage from it is either negligible
or not at all.
Now, as far as the development of the bomb itself,
have To my knowledge, we have never dropped two
atomic bombs close by simultaneously. Is that
true?
Never detonated two of them close together?
Within a mile or two apart from each other. Well, I
hadn't thought about it. Let me see.
Because this is important, of course, for the MIRV
and the multi-warheads that we have today. If we
could think just hypothetically, what would
happen if two or three or four bombs hit a city in one
area just a few miles apart? Do we know? We
certainly could calculate.
I think the answer is yes, we know. We don't know
from experience. There's a difference. But it
would not be difficult to calculate. All one would
need is the conditions under which the four
detonations went off. I mean, by that location,
altitude, and size of the individual detonation.
The rest of it could be calculated pretty easily.
And I'm sure it has been. I haven't done it, but I'm
sure it has been. But as far as you know, we've never
done a multiple explosion. No, as a practical
matter, we haven't. I don't know of anything in
particular to be gained by it. There's no mystery
about it as far as I know. Okay, well what about the
idea that if you have one explosion with a
shockwave moving out and then a couple miles away
you have another one, what's going to happen when
those shockwaves hit, or three or four of those hit
at the same time? I mean, I'm a novice, but that to me
is somewhat of a mystery, and I was wondering—
Well, it's not a mystery. It will create a
different kind of devastation along this area
where the shock waves meet.
some more severe, some less severe, depending
upon the conditions. But again, that can be
plotted and calculated, and it's not mysterious.
Okay, okay. Now away from fiction and toward fact,
and that is the test-ban treaty. which was a fact,
and signed between Kennedy and Khrushchev in
1963, which meant that the United States now would
go underground with testing. Were you for or
against that? Well,
the treaty that was signed
I was against. I have to qualify that. I
felt that we should have had a better treaty before
we committed ourselves that far.
If one takes the position, well that's the best
treaty you can get, which I think the President did
take that position, or recognized that as a
condition. Then yes, I would have gone ahead and
signed it, because there was just too much testing
and there were going to be more, and we were getting
into a bad situation. This could slow down
development in countries who had not devoted as
much effort as we had to underground testing. I
think by that time we were fairly sophisticated in
what we could do underground. And we had done
enough in the atmosphere that we knew the
parameters, at least, of the effects that we would
get in the atmosphere. So there were nothing, no
areas that, about which we knew nothing. There
were areas in which we would have liked to have
known some more. we had at least some knowledge
about them and could go underground and go ahead
with the development.
My reason for being against the treaty was the same
as it is now. If we have to give away our birthright
in order to get those guys to agree to sign a treaty
with us, then no treaty as far as I'm concerned.
What do you mean by that, give away our birthright?
Well, give them all the advantages and we kind of
unilaterally go ahead and make ourselves nude. I
don't buy that in weapons testing or armament or
any other area. And
if you have no way of verifying, they have no way of
inspection, you can't believe the information
that you do get, uh, then I think you're just kind of
standing around naked and waiting for, to get
clobbered. And I don't buy that. I recognize that
sometimes they have to go further than they want to
in that direction. And I think the President did
that in the case of our test ban.
Whether it was a justified thing, I'm sure will
take, uh, a lot more years than I'm going to live to
determine. Did you express your views to
President Kennedy on this? Well, to the extent
that anyone could, because you have, of course,
regular mechanisms for that. And my position
there, I was on several working groups, and I had my
people on several working groups that worked
daily with the ACDA and others in developing U.S.
positions and putting our input. And I've pointed
all these things out. And many times when you're in
government, in our government, in these
countries, you're not asked for a
recommendation. You're asked for evaluations
and factual analyses. And this is proper. I mean,
there's nothing wrong with that. But that was
mainly the area where I was and where my people was
in that particular problem. And we did that to the
very best of our ability, and I think it was good
because we had some very capable people. Okay.
Now, when the test ban treaty was You were with the
Atomic Energy Commission. Yes, I was their
manager. What impact did it have on the AEC, and did
you have any friends back at the Armed Forces
Special Weapons Project that could tell you what
impact it had on them? Well, yes, we worked with
them constantly, and the impact on them would have
been the same as it was on us, as a matter of fact.
It
had the effect of slowing down our development
program and making it much more costly.
I guess there were some lesser effects, but those
are the two main things that it did.
Another thing I was interested in was those early
tests, like Bikini and some of the other ones, do
you remember what your first impressions were
when you saw your first nuclear explosion or
atomic explosion? Yes. I was on one
of our communications ships—I've forgotten the
name of it now—in Bikini or just out of Bikini
Lagoon. When the shot was fired, it was one drop
from an airplane and one off at two thousand feet
about.
Maybe not quite that high, I've forgotten
exactly, but it was an air burst anyway. And it was
my first view of a chain reaction of a nuclear
detonation, a nuclear explosion.
and the suddenness and the magnitudes
and the disruption
that was caused by it, all within milliseconds,
was something that's a little difficult for your
mind to follow unless you've had some practice,
and I had no practice at that point. And of course,
in the South Pacific, with the very, very moist
air, with the shock wave ballooning out from the
explosion, and it formed a
dense cloud in the form of a diving bell with the
bottom on the surface of the water that gradually
expanded and went out. this
huge explosion with all of its colors and boiling
and disruption was suddenly closed in this diving
bell of clouds. And almost equally quickly, that
was dispersed by the heat. And so it was a very
spectacular show.
if you were thinking in terms of being on target
and comparing that with
being on target against other weapons that we had
just finished a war using.
made your mind stop working for a little bit to do
some thinking, because you could not see how
anything could survive. And
even under a bomb barrage in World War II, you could
visualize that if you were under the right covert
or someplace, there was a chance you could get by.
But your mind told you that there was no chance
there. Actually, that doesn't turn out to be
correct, but almost. So it was,
well, it's a highly emotional scene, the first one
you see. You
think of the forces of nature that you didn't know
about, and how great they are, or what great
magnitude they are. It shakes
you a bit.
Did you change over time when you saw more and more
of these?
No, I didn't. It grew.
Because that explosion I think was around twenty
megatons as I remember, more or less that anyhow. I
mean twenty kilotons.
I went on to see explosions of many megatons under
various circumstances.
And that first flash is always the same. It's just
bigger and more telling on your mind.
There were British advisors at that test, weren't
there? There were. British, not advisors, but
witnesses at that test? Yes, there were. French,
too? Yes, there were, well there were several,
many foreign countries there. Were the Russians
invited? Yes, Russian was right on board my ship.
He was standing on deck with me when we watched it go
up. What was his comment? Not so big. Not so big?
That's what he said? That's all he said. Not so big.
Not so big. Some people have contended that we
invited the Russians to this to make sure that They
saw what would happen to them if they didn't come to
some post-war agreements with us. I can't answer
that. I don't know why they were invited. Of
course, the Russians were not the only ones. There
were a lot of others.
So
I can't answer that. I was in the Joint Staff and
relatively new at it at that time, so I don't know
what the rationale was. Okay. I'd like to know
about
selling atomic energy. During the 1950s, the
government carried out a
campaign, basically, and a lot of companies did,
an attempt to convince the American public that
atomic energy was not only safe, but it might
resolve a number of the questions like power and
energy. And I was wondering if at the Special
Weapons Project or at the AEC, if you were in any way
involved with some of those campaigns? Yes, not at
the Special Weapons Project, because we were
concerned solely with weapons and power reactors
for military purposes.
But in AEC, And as general manager, well, yes, I was
deeply involved in all of those campaigns. Not so
much in trying to sell someone something. Our job,
the whole purpose of creating the Atomic Energy
Commission was to provide a means of developing
atomic energy from its early status there. to
peaceful applications for MADCON. All of us
firmly believed that it had the capacity for that
application and for achieving that goal. And we
spent a lot of taxpayers' dollars to get there. And
what we really were doing was defending our
actions in developing the nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. And we're not consciously on a
campaign to sell it, except to convince people,
particularly Congress, that we were on the right
track in development in the best interest of the
United States. And in spite of the fact that
nuclear energy has taken a tremendous back step, I
still think that we were right at that time. And if
we had continued to have support as we did, well,
during the time that I was there and before that,
half of the Power in the United States would not be
coming from nuclear energy, and it would be half
the price it is right now. And many, many other
applications, too.
The fact that people's hands have been tied in
the development of the peaceful applications of
nuclear energy, particularly in power, to me is a
crime against the United States that is
unforgivable.
It demonstrates to me a gullibility of some of our
people that makes me sick. Well, what about the
argument course that many opponents of nuclear
energy say in contemporary America, and that is
that they point to Three Mile Island. They point to
Three Mile Island and the accident we had there a
couple of years ago. What's bad about Three Mile
Island? I'm just asking you. Well, I'm telling
you. I mean, I'm saying that this would be the
question, I think, to somebody who points to Three
Mile Island. you tell me what happened at Three
Mile Island that was bad. So far as I can find, not a
damn thing. The only thing that was bad about Three
Mile Island is that some people got out among the
populace who lived close by, whipped them up to a
fever pitch, and got them going all about nothing,
and caused a hell of a big problem.